IBX-5706: DDEV usage (#1983)
ibexa/documentation-developer: docs/infrastructure_and_maintenance/clustering/ibexa_cloud_and_ddev.md

- [like other existing project, without this add-on](#Without-the-platformsh-add-on).

## With the `ddev-platformsh` add-on

To configure the [`ddev/ddev-platformsh` add-on](https://github.com/ddev/ddev-platformsh), you need a [Platform.sh API Token](https://docs.platform.sh/administration/cli/api-tokens.html).

The `ddev/ddev-platformsh` add-on configures the document root, the PHP version, the database and the cache pool according to the Ibexa Cloud configuration. About the search engine, the add-on can configure Elasticsearch but can't configure Solr. If you use Solr on Ibexa Cloud and want to add it to your DDEV stack, see [clustering with DDEV and `ibexa/ddev-solr` add-on](clustering_with_ddev.md#solr).

`COMPOSER_AUTH` from Platform.sh can't be used, because JSON commas are incorrectly interpreted by `--web-environment-add`, which sees them as multiple variable separators.
But the variable must exist for Platform.sh `hooks` scripts to work. To use an `auth.json` file for this purpose, see [Using an auth.json](install_with_ddev.md#using-an-authjson).

You must remove Node.js and NVM installations as they're already included in DDEV.

The following sequence of commands:

> 1. Downloads the Ibexa Cloud Platform.sh project from the default environment "production" into a new directory. (Replace `<project-ID>` with the hash of your own project. See [`platform help get`](https://docs.platform.sh/administration/cli.html#3-use) for options like selecting another environment).

Author: Yes, especially since #2064

---

> description: When you want to run locally an Ibexa Cloud project using DDEV.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: How to run locally an Ibexa Cloud project using DDEV.
```

---

# Ibexa Cloud and DDEV

> Two ways are available to run locally an Ibexa Cloud project using DDEV:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two ways are available to run an Ibexa Cloud project locally using DDEV:
```

- [Using the `ddev-platformsh` add-on](#simulate-ibexa-cloud-using-the-ddev-platformsh-add-on).
- [Like other existing project, without this add-on](#simulate-ibexa-cloud-without-the-platformsh-add-on).

## Simulate Ibexa Cloud using the `ddev-platformsh` add-on

To configure the [`ddev/ddev-platformsh` add-on](https://github.com/ddev/ddev-platformsh), you'll need a [Platform.sh API Token](https://docs.platform.sh/administration/cli/api-tokens.html).

> `COMPOSER_AUTH` from PLatform.sh can't be properly used as JSON commas will be badly interpreted by `--web-environment-add` which would see them as multiple variables' separators. But, it must exist for Platform.sh hooks' scripts to work. An auth.json file can be used, see [Using an auth.json](../../getting_started/install_using_ddev.md#using-an-authjson) for more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`COMPOSER_AUTH` from Platform.sh can't be properly used, because JSON commas are incorrectly interpreted by `--web-environment-add`, which sees them as multiple variables' separators.
But the variable must exist for Platform.sh hooks' scripts to work. An `auth.json` file can be used, see [Using an auth.json](install_using_ddev.md#using-an-authjson) for more.
```

> This example sequence will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example sequence will:
```

- start the project
- get the content from Platform.sh, both database and binary files using `ddev pull platform` feature from the add-on,
- restart the project,
- display information about the project services,
- open the project into a browser.

```bash
platform project:get <project-ID> my-ddev-project && cd my-ddev-project
ddev config --project-type=php --php-version 8.1 \
  --docroot=public --create-docroot \
  --http-port=8080 --https-port=8443 \
  --web-environment-add DATABASE_URL=mysql://db:db@db:3306/db \
  --web-environment-add CACHE_POOL=cache.redis \
  --web-environment-add CACHE_DSN=redis \
  --web-environment-add COMPOSER_AUTH=''
echo '.ddev/' >> .gitignore
cp <path-to-an>/auth.json .ddev/homeadditions/
if [ ! -d public/var ]; then mkdir public/var; fi
ddev get ddev/ddev-platformsh
sed -i -E "s/( +)(.*nvm (install|use).*)/\1#\2/" .ddev/config.platformsh.yaml
sed -i 's/maxmemory-policy allkeys-lfu/maxmemory-policy volatile-lfu/' .ddev/redis/redis.conf
ddev start
ddev pull platform -y
ddev restart
ddev describe
ddev launch
```

!!! note

>     As the Platform.sh API token is set at user profile level, it will be stored globaly under current user root as `PLATFORMSH_CLI_TOKEN` in ~/.ddev/global_config.yaml.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    As the Platform.sh API token is set at user profile level, it will be stored globally under current user root as `PLATFORMSH_CLI_TOKEN` in `~/.ddev/global_config.yaml`.
```

## Simulate Ibexa Cloud without the Platform.sh add-on

> The following example adapt the [manual method to run an already existing project](../../getting_started/install_using_ddev.md#run-an-already-existing-project) to the Platform.sh case:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example adapts the [manual method to run an already existing project](install_using_ddev.md#run-an-already-existing-project) to the Platform.sh case:
```

> This example sequence will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example sequence will:
```

- set Composer authentication,
- [get the database content from Platform.sh](https://docs.platform.sh/add-services/mysql.html#exporting-data),
- [import this database content into DDEV project's database](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/usage/database-management/#database-imports),
- [download the Platform.sh public/var locally](https://docs.platform.sh/development/file-transfer.html#transfer-a-file-from-a-mount) to have the content binary files,
- and open the DDEV project into a browser.

```bash
platform project:get <project-ID> my-ddev-project && cd my-ddev-project
ddev config --project-type=php --php-version 8.1 \
  --docroot=public \
  --web-environment-add DATABASE_URL=mysql://db:db@db:3306/db \
  --http-port=8080 --https-port=8443
echo '.ddev/' >> .gitignore
ddev start
ddev composer config --global http-basic.updates.ibexa.co <installation-key> <token-password>
platform db:dump --gzip --file=production.sql.gz
ddev import-db --src=production.sql.gz && rm production.sql.gz
platform mount:download --mount public/var --target public/var
ddev composer install
ddev launch
```

From there, services can be added to get closer to Ibexa Cloud Platform.sh architecture.

> `.platform/services.yaml` indicate the services used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`.platform/services.yaml` indicates the services used.
```

---
description: How to run locally an Ibexa Cloud project using DDEV.
---

# Ibexa Cloud and DDEV

Two ways are available to run an Ibexa Cloud project locally using DDEV:

- [Using the `ddev-platformsh` add-on](#simulate-ibexa-cloud-using-the-ddev-platformsh-add-on).
- [Like other existing project, without this add-on](#simulate-ibexa-cloud-without-the-platformsh-add-on).

## Simulate Ibexa Cloud using the `ddev-platformsh` add-on

To configure the [`ddev/ddev-platformsh` add-on](https://github.com/ddev/ddev-platformsh), you'll need a [Platform.sh API Token](https://docs.platform.sh/administration/cli/api-tokens.html).

> `COMPOSER_AUTH` from Platform.sh can't be used, because JSON commas are incorrectly interpreted by `--web-environment-add`, which sees them as multiple variables' separators.
> But the variable must exist for Platform.sh hooks' scripts to work. An `auth.json` file can be used, see [Using an auth.json](install_using_ddev.md#using-an-authjson) for more.

Author: @dabrt  I wrote "hooks'" because `hooks` is the entry key in .platform.app.yaml. Does it work if I highlight as code?:

```suggestion
`COMPOSER_AUTH` from Platform.sh can't be used, because JSON commas are incorrectly interpreted by `--web-environment-add`, which sees them as multiple variable separators.
But the variable must exist for Platform.sh `hooks` scripts to work. To use an `auth.json` file for this purpose, see [Using an auth.json](install_using_ddev.md#using-an-authjson).
```

## Simulate Ibexa Cloud without the Platform.sh add-on

The following example adapts the [manual method to run an already existing project](install_with_ddev.md#run-an-already-existing-project) to the Platform.sh case:

The following sequence of commands:

1. Downloads the Ibexa Cloud Platform.sh project from the default environment "production" into a new directory. (Replace `<project-ID>` with the hash of your own project. See [`platform help get`](https://docs.platform.sh/administration/cli.html#3-use) for options like selecting another environment).
1. Configures a new DDEV project.
1. Ignores `.ddev/` directory from Git.
1. Starts the DDEV project.
1. Sets Composer authentication.
1. [Gets the database content from Platform.sh](https://docs.platform.sh/add-services/mysql.html#exporting-data).
1. [Imports this database content into DDEV project's database](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/usage/database-management/#database-imports).
1. [Downloads the Platform.sh public/var locally](https://docs.platform.sh/development/file-transfer.html#transfer-a-file-from-a-mount) to have the content binary files.

> 1. Opens the DDEV project in a browser.

Author: @ibexa-yuna I'm not sure. From my understanding of this remark, this is covered by the paragraph at line 91 about installing more services.
